The paper consists of both a long theoretical part and a case
study. From the title I get the impression that the empirical study is
the focus. If this is the intention, it would be better if the
theoretical part is shortened considerably and more focused towards
the questions addressed in the case-study. The abstract should present
a short version of the paper, i.e. problem, results… As it is now it
fits better in the introduction. It is sometimes hard to follow the
reasoning. For example, the first sentence claims that “musical
notation has an ontologically crucial function”. In the first reading
there is no way to understand what you mean by that. Statements like
that should be motivated when given or skipped. The first two
paragraphs in section 2 are rather vague and hard to understand. Could
they be omitted? For example, it’s problematic to discuss the concept
of “center” if it cannot be defined or described. In section 3.1 the
intention is to write a harp piece and you start with a musical
fragment that doesn’t make sense to play on a harp. This choice would
be nice if you motivated. In the five different conclusion given on
the last page you state for example that “Composition is in itself
made up of a….”. These are rather strong claims indicating that these
conclusions are always true. It would be better to include a “may” in
these claims: “Composition may consist of a complex…” References
missing in reference list: Hultberg and Östersjö 2005; Molino 1990

****************************************

Interesting exploration of artistic research. May be expected to
enhance the creative and live-interactive aspect of the
conference. However, presentation badly needs clear language and
strong articulation of its tenets. First section could be more
succinct and profiled: which concepts do you yourself most care about?
Second section: please summarize your position at the end before you
go into all the empirical details. Third section: unfortunately, the
video clip appeared to be no longer available on Frisk's website at
the time of this review. Regarding the conclusion: how does this kind
of research feed back into your practice? What do we gain from it?
