![](media/image1.gif){width="6.531944444444444in"
height="0.9486111111111111in"}

**[JOURNAL OF SONIC STUDIES]{.smallcaps}**

**[REVIEW FORM]{.smallcaps}**

-   PART 1: General information

**As a reviewer, you represent your community, and your review should be
professional and constructive. The quality of the *Journal of Sonic
Studies* (*JSS*) depends on the quality of reviews, which we consider to
be more about "engaging" with the submission than "judging" it. The job
of the reviewer is to select high-quality, innovative submissions for
*JSS*, and to suggest ways to improve the research as well as to uphold
and/or raise the standards of the sound studies community as a whole. A
persuasive review includes a summary of the strengths and weaknesses of
the submission, and the opinion of the reviewer regarding these.**

Title of essay: **Sound Intuition**

Author name: **n/a**

Your name:

Affiliation:

Date: **15.10.23**

Please keep in mind that we will share your comments with the author(s).

Please indicate your preference:

-   ~~Include personal details~~

-   **Omit personal details**

In your opinion, does the *subject matter* covered in this submission
make it suitable for publication within *JSS*?

-   **Yes**

-   ~~No~~

![](media/image1.gif){width="6.531944444444444in"
height="0.9486111111111111in"}

-   PART 2: Overall quality of the textual part of the submission

**Although we explicitly invite both (academic) scholars and artists to
contribute, we expect all contributions to have a firm theoretical
grounding. The primary aim of *JSS* is to further develop the discourse
on sound studies. Please give your opinion on the textual part of the
submission, in 500 words or less, highlighting its strengths and
weaknesses, and, if possible or deemed necessary, suggest ways to
improve the submission, while taking into account the following
criteria:**

-   Is the text based on clear objectives?

-   Does it contain an adequate account of the methodological approach?

-   Does it offer a consistent and logical argument?

-   What can you say about the structure of the submission: would
    specific alternatives make it a better contribution?

-   Does it offer a relevant contribution to the field of sonic studies,
    by contributing to a better understanding, empirical or otherwise,
    of sonic phenomena, a theoretical development in the field of sonic
    studies, or a problematization of existing views?

-   Is the topic contextualized, which may include social, artistic,
    and/or theoretical issues that the author responds to?

-   Does it make adequate reference to the existing literature or is
    there important literature which is omitted?

**The relationship of 'intuition' to a more abstracted 'analytical'
approach to sound is established in the introduction but is made
confused by phrases such as -- 'harbour a number of emotions',
'understanding of the meaning of the sound' -- these are topics that
seem thrown in without proper explanation. The Schaeffer/Smalley
introductory paragraph confuses the relationship of 'objective
measurables' of (say) 'spectrum' and their perceived consequences.**

- probably fixed

**The problem of communicating the essence of artistic research as
written up by the practitioner is extremely important. However, there
needs to be a more developed discussion on the relationship which is
summarized in the sentence -- "In this case the sound may not be
understood as an object, but is rather an ongoing activity". This is a
fundamental point for the whole discussion.**

- addressed

**The application of Bergson's ideas as a 'method' is a good one -- this
is not taken uncritically, some applications in studio settings are
taken to undermine its applicability. Some good points here that could
be amplified.**



**There are a number of assertions that need further discussion:
"Artistic research could in this regard continuously be seen as a
possibility to widen the perspectives of how the formation of knowledge
takes place." -- does this mean *any* knowledge?**

- addressed

**Using a dictionary definition of intuition is acceptable -- but the
one used here seems to contrast 'feelings' and 'facts' in a way I find
problematic for the argument developed in this article.**

- removed reference

**"If I move my leg or my hand I can only access the information that
guides this movement through intuition." Does this suggest that seeing
intuition in terms of 'information' would move the result to the
'analytical'? (that is virtually stated about half a page later).
Perhaps 'understanding' needs to be discussed here.**

- addressed

**"Practicing the instrument over many years allows the musician to
develop a very instinctual relation to the instrument." This point and
the discussion that follows it are a very important part of the argument
and might be expanded. The essential question is about learning. We
might teach a beginner through specifically described procedures. These
are learnt, sublimated and eventually retrieved without conscious
recall. Is this the core mechanism for the creation of 'intuitive'
skills? -- are there others?**

- very interesting: addressed

**The section starting on p.7 concerns the computer as instrument. This
is an important topic. Distributed creation does make a discussion more
difficult but these are issues of *agency* -- what is the responsible
entity? Issues of AI might be raised here. The computer may be common
between arts and science laboratories but the methodologies not at all.
The Oliveros 'Deep Listening' link is useful but I doubt the summary
given -- we get 'inside' the sound in a different way than that in the
Bergson examples. And are 'deductive methods' really so common in the
electronic music studio -- several composition approaches are quite
intuitive? 

- addressed

**The intuitive analysis on the following page of a rain forest
-- seems to be little more than 'auditory scene analysis' (cf.
Bregman).**

- addressed

**The paragraph including "Access to these layers of the sound is really
only available through an intuitive mode of listening" is problematic.
The example given seems readily available to a listener: timbral gesture
remapped onto space and suggests a non-intuition approach.**

- addressed

**The section discussing the 'difference tone' working raises questions:
why a "certain transgression of the sound"? strictly when frequencies
are very close the two original waves are not always separately
discernible (especially sine waves); the choice of pitch roots and
partial tones is not fully explained -- simply "I settle on a subset of
intervals whose beatings have a particularly interesting sound"?; also
to say "the sounding result of the interference is obviously different
than the calculation" is to compare two different things. And "the
\"correctness\" may only be evaluated from the inside of the sound, not
from the system alone" is surely a simple statement of *any* such
compositional decision.**

- addressed

![](media/image1.gif){width="6.531944444444444in"
height="0.9486111111111111in"}

-   PART 3: Overall quality of the non-textual materials

**The *JSS* editors welcome scholarly as well as artistic research. In
both cases, especially welcomed are those contributions which explicitly
use the Research Catalogue as a medium, e.g. by inserting A/V materials,
hyperlinks, and the use of non-conventional, non-linear structures.
Please give your opinion on the non-textual materials of the submission,
and, if possible or deemed necessary, suggest ways to improve the
submission, in 200 words or less, taking into account the following
criteria:**

-   Does the quality of the A/V material fits *JSS*?

-   Does the submission demonstrate a good balance between textual and
    A/V materials?

-   Does the author make good use of hyperlinks or other materials
    already available on the Internet?

**None submitted.**

**This prompts me to suggest that properly reformed within the overall
structure of the article the 'interference' example might benefit from a
well-chosen set of sound examples.**

- will address

-   PART 4: Your general opinion on the text

**Please give your overall recommendation concerning this submission by
selecting option A, B, C, or D:**

A.  The submission is suitable for publication by the *Journal of Sonic
    Studies*, once routine editing has been completed

B.  The submission is suitable for publication by the *Journal of Sonic
    Studies*, if substantial changes are made

C.  **The submission is not suitable for publication by the *Journal of
    Sonic Studies*, unless a thoroughly revised version is submitted for
    re-evaluation**

D.  The submission is not suitable for publication by the *Journal of
    Sonic Studies*

**C -- the topic is completely relevant to the aims of JSS. The
communication of 'internal' states of sound perception, evaluation,
judgement to others is a perennial and sometimes contentious field. I am
not sure it is quite placed accurately here with respect to 'artistic
research' as clearly the results of such research are designed *a
priori* to be communicated. Bergson's work, too, remains relevant and
applicable. However, it is probably unavoidable that it needs to be
better referred to later approaches to sound apperception -- citing
Schaeffer and Smalley inevitably raises the topic of phenomenology, for
example -- perhaps at clearly referenced 'footnote' level, but we do
need this ongoing context. Ideas of intuition and 'analytical judgement'
are profoundly difficult to untangle. I am not sure that learning and
instinct are fully addressed to fit into this dichotomy -- which may
turn out to be a *continuum* not a binary division. Overall the
submission is also not clearly 'formed' into the trajectory of an
argument. 

A thorough look again at section topics, the way the overall
pieces fit together, would make even what is already here easier to read
and understand. I have made a range of points in the appraisal section
above that cover unclear argument, what I believe to be factual checks
and a range of generalisations that need more substance. I encourage
reworking and resubmission -- this is potentially valuable insight into
both 'how' and 'why' compositional decisions come about.**
