#title Musical Improvisation and Computers: in-time performance
#date Sep 21, 2010
#author Henrik Frisk
#bibsource bibliography


* Musical Improvisation and Computers: in-time performance.

** Abstract

One of the perhaps more obvious differences between composed and improvised
music is the fact that the latter unfolds in real-time, whereas parts of the
former is constructed outside of real-time. This is not to say, however, that
improvised music is void of compositional strategies, only that the in-time
aspect of improvisation--i.e. the way that the practice of improvisation is
embedded in time--is one of its important and significant
features. The temporal properties of a machine, furthermore, are in every
respect different from those of a human, something which the computer
improviser has to address, either in the ways the interface is constructed, or
in the ways that the computer instruments are designed (or both). In my presentation I will
show how these issues influence both my artistic practice and my research.


Although few art forms are unanimously non-real time or real-time, a distinction used below is that between artistic practices that are *embedded in time* (in-time processes) and those that are *contained in time* (over-time processes).[1] For an action to be embedded in time means that the time it takes to perform it matters; that time is a factor whose value is decisive. For example, the difference between reading or writing a book in one day or to do it in one year is not necessarily a difference that changes the meaning or expression of the book, whereas the time it takes to play or listen to a piece of music has everything to do with its expressive qualities: playing the same piece of music in ten minutes or in two hours is likely to make it a very different experience. For this reason it is argued here that there is a difference between a reflection upon the research object as a whole (outside time) and a reflection on the research object as it unfolds in time and the researcher engaged in arts based research in the real-time arts should embrace and investigate the in-time properties of the research object. Questions relating to the documentation and dissemination of in-time insights are further discussed and a point is made that the outcome of an arts based research that investigates the complex feedback loops in the time-based arts may be of interest also outside the art world. 

In the real-time arts, how may these in-time processes be discussed in a fruitful manner, and how can their relations to the `object' of research be understood? What is the relation between the performer's in-time processes and that of the listeners/viewers? If the practice is embedded in time, as an in-time process, what actually consititutes the object of research?

In this kind of reduced interaction, a reaction to any given action is ignorant to any prior actions or reactions.
Musical interaction, on the other hand, is all about reciprocity, particularly in improvised music. <cite>monson96</cite> A successful interplay between musicians involved in an improvisation rests on a mutual sensitivity for taking, and responding to, musical initiatives. Musicians induce differences rather than alter states; they induce differences that ``*make a difference*''. [2]

Musical improvisation rests on a Vorverstehen (pre-understanding) of the interactivity involved in improvisation. The listener does not have to understand what or how the players are interacting in order to appreciate the sofistication of the interaction. In the dis-emobodied world of technology however, the interaction is commonly seen as a failure if the nature of the interaction, its cues and responses, is not obvious to the user.

Meanwhile, 
In the context of Interactive Music, the dissimilarity in the way in which man and machine deal with time and memory, may easily disrupt the performer as well as the researcher. Again, as *forgetting devices* machines allow for a detached attitude towards history and cultural heritage and as such, they participate in the creation of novel artistic expressions. 

Musical performance and improvisation are typical in-time operations: They are *embedded in time* (to use Smither's expression) whereas over-time operations may be said to be *contained in time*. Along with advances in computer science and robotics, real time computation has altered the picture somewhat, but the distinction between an over-time operation being so fast that time goes unnoticed is very different from the way the mind ``exploits both the constraints and allowances of the natural timescales of the body and the brain as a total physical system.'' <cite>iyer08</cite> (p. 276) The in-time versus over-time distinction is interesting with regard to the topic of time and temporality, but it is also of interest to the specific topic of Interactive music. As a genre, Interactive music (as was noted above) descend from Computer Music, also called Electro-acoustic music, and has strong interdisciplinary connections with subject areas such as Artificial Intelligence, Cognitive Science and Computer Science. <cite>moore90</cite> (p. 24) These disciplines are concerned with trying to understand human behavior and, to some extent, attempt to mimic that behavior in machines. In the context of arts based research it is important to draw upon knowledge that emanates from related fields of inquiry but it is equally important to re-evaluate those same sources. Historically there may have been a tendency for Computer music to lean against the natural sciences that, in fact, may also have much to gain from learning from the artistic practice of Computer music, or other artistic practices. The concept of time in general and the in-time aspect of music in particular. For the researcher engaged in arts based research it is important to remember that the primary purpose of the research should not only be to manifest theories external to the field of research but also critically examine and question the related sciences. What modes of thinking correspond to the practice and what ideas deviate from it? If the practice is embedded in time, as an in-time process, what actually consititutes the object of research?

The aspect of interaction in the field of interactive art and media is problematic as the term *interactive* to some extent has been hijacked by computer interface designers. Though one of its lexicographic meanings is ``Reciprocally active'',[3] its meaning in the context of computer interface design is more geared towards a methodology of control, than sharing, or mutual exchange. In the reduced meaning of computer interaction the actions of one part, `the user', is used to control the *re*actions of the other, `the machine', often in a one-to-one relation: one action, one re-action. In this kind of reduced interaction, a reaction to any given action is ignorant to any prior actions or reactions. A mouse click on a given icon on a computer desktop typically results in the same machine response, regardless of the user's preceding activities. Musical interaction, on the other hand, is all about reciprocity, particularly in improvised music. <cite>monson96</cite> A successful interplay between musicians involved in an improvisation rests on a mutual sensitivity for taking, and responding to, musical initiatives. Musicians induce differences rather than alter states; they induce differences that ``*make a difference*''.  
Even for an orchestra conductor---who is commonly seen as the *director* of the music, commanding its flow---the agency of control is limited to what can be achieved through interaction with the musicians in the orchestra. Interaction-as-control and interaction-as-difference are not clear cut definitions in binary opposition. Again we are dealing with a continuum; a continuum of interactive potential ranging from the most reduced form of interaction-as-control (click and response) to the infinitely complex interaction-as-difference (e.g. human interaction, musical interaction, performer/audience interaction). 
The activity of playing back a CD-recording of a symphony on a sound system is an example of the former while conducting a symphony orchestra playing the same symphony is an (extreme) example of latter. What one may gain in control with the CD player, the recording and the sound system---a CD can be paused, repeated, removed, etc.---we loose in influence over content. 
As conductors we may alter the music in ways that we see fit, limited merely by cultural and social practices. But what we gain in influence in this context we loose in control: We can not as easily pause a live performance, considerable financial resources needs to be deployed in order to gather all the musicians needed, the training needed to be able to conduct a symphony orchestra is counted in years whereas the training needed to play back a CD is counted in seconds, etc. While engaging in practice based research within the framework of a real time art form the researcher should embrace the temporal complexity of the artistic practice: What are the differences that makes a difference?

A number of composers and theorists have stressed the multiplicity of temporal modes present in music and the American electronic music composers Curtis Roads makes the interesting remark that the discontinuities that appear in the boundaries between different time scales gives rise to perceptual differences in sonic events. <cite>roads</cite> (p. 4)  A note terribly out of tune in one temporal order may have just the right intonation in another, and a beat out of sync in one time scale may swing in another. For an example of the great variation in rhythmic timing among jazz musicians when observed at high temporal resolution, see <cite>friberg02</cite>

To the Greek composer and architect Iannis Xenakis the discontinuity of time was of pivotal import. Not only the interruptions that occur when moving across the boundaries between different temporal scales, but also the separability of events occurring within the flux of one particular time scale. 

A popular example is the famous scene in Hitchcock's 1959 movie *Vertigo*. Madeleine (played by Kim Novak), whose identity is overwhelmed by her great grand-mother, is standing in front of a cross section of an over 1000 years old Redwood tree. She places her finger towards the outer ring of the tree and marks out the point where she was born and the point where she died. The distance between the two points is short relative to the size of the tree, and, as she is moving her finger across the wood, she says ``It was only a moment to you''. <cite>hitchcock59</cite> The cross section of the tree is used to spatialize a (short) life span, to transform a duration to a distance, to transform time to space. Another, similarly schizophrenic, example is the end of the first act of Richard Wagner's opera Parsifal (cited above) where there is a slightly more subtle and continuous transformation from time to space. Parsifal makes a remark that, despite his slow pace he already seem to have come far. The explanation offered to him is that ``time here becomes space''. <cite>wagner82</cite> (act 1)

This perceptual non-linearity between cause and effect can also be found in the sometimes asymmetrical communications between a performer, an interactive computer system, and listeners. Imagine a performance where the computer `listens' to the performer and responds to a given set of triggers (a particular note, a gesture, a rhythm, etc.). Imagine further that in the performance the system fails at recognizing a particular trigger, with the effect that the desired response is not achieved. This `mistake' is likely to alter the music. Not only because the desired response was not triggered, but also because the performer, in response to the missed cue, may alter the playing in order to facilitate the computer recognition (play the triggering phrase louder, slower, shorter or faster, etc). A reflection upon past and current events in one domain (``*the computer missed my cue*''), induces a change in another, which in turn may lead to altered decisions in yet a third domain (*I should re-write the program*). Although the same scenario could happen between two human performers, even if we disregard the comparatively limited interactive potential with the computer, its temporality makes the human-computer interaction distinct from human-human interaction. 
%The trajectories of reflection upon the missed cue, and its consequences, cause changes in the system which may not easily be traced back to the cause. 
%The differing modalities of reflection, which have their roots in differing temporalitites, may create a breach between the perception of the event and its cause. 

A computer program written to perform in an interactive performance may have pre-conceived structures not unlike a musical composition or a structured improvisation and writing such a program is an over-time process similar to how composing is an over-time process. Furthermore writing a musical composition and performing it involves similar kinds of tensions between over-time and in-time decisions that may be found in the performance with an interactive computer. Now, whereas a musical score is not easily changed during a performance,[4] in the case of the interactive computer, whatever the agenda used to construct the program, if the interaction is successfully exploited, the agenda may be altered. Not only in the performance but *by* the performance. But this can of course only be true if we resist and challenge the simplicity of the click-and-response interaction discussed above and take full account of time and memory.

The asymmetry in the trajectories of reflection discussed above is also mirrored in the performer-computer-listener interactions. The musical in-time evaluation on a series of events emanating from the computer, made without knowledge of, or interest in their origin (i.e. the musician's particular interaction with the computer), will not necessarily correspond to an evaluation of the same events from *within* the process. The consequence may be that, in a response to the performer's reflection, a change is introduced in the output that, to a listener, who is primarily concerned with the audible trace, and may be unaware or unconcerned with the details of the musician-computer interaction, sounds awkward. The differing modalities of reflection which have their roots in differing % temporalitites, creates a breach between the listener and the performer. The temporal differences is one aspect of the issue at stake here, but it is not the only one. 
Due to a poor performance, bad programming or some other factor the % virtuality of the computer instrument fails to reveal itself and the musical decisions made by the performer becomes enigmatic to the listener.
Either way,

But in real-time performance, in improvisation---in the spur of the moment---the leap from `now' to a virtual plane of the past may create a breach similar to how musical decisions made based on information hidden from the listener creates a breach, as was discussed above.
These leaps may be carried out as a result of affectivity within the performer or simply by aesthetic choices.

Music has had an out-of-time spatial representation ever since musical notation was introduced. In the Western music history there is a tendency of disregarding the performative aspects of a musical work and regarding the score, i.e. its graphical representation, as equal to the identity of the work.[5] Furthermore, with the advent of recording technology, not only the representation of sound in scores, but also sound itself has been transformed into space: ``We might say that recording is a reflux, or distillation in which time is boiled off, for time must be added back in to get sound, in the form of a steady motion of the turntable or tape heads or the crystal clock in digital recording.'' <cite>evens05</cite> (p.54) In the engravings on an LP, or through the holes on the surface of a CD, the elusive nature of sound as embedded in time is captured and spatialized. The digital representation of sound in a computer is similarly spatialized: In other words, to even begin to think about using interactive computer technology in performance involves a transformation of the in-time embedded sound to an over-time representation.

In his book *Digital Performance: A History of New Media in Theater, Dance, Performance Art, and Installation* Steve Dixon discusses the problematic issue of `liveness' in performance. There is a common sense that technology have ``transformed or destabilized notions of liveness, presence, and the `real''', <cite>dixon07</cite> (p. 127) suggesting that the real-time arts somehow becomes less `live' when technology is made use of. Similar ideas have been discussed in this chapter based on the notion that the temporality of technology is different from the temporalities of live performance. Even though a performer (and an audience), simultaneously employs a number of different temporalities, the addition of the computer appears to sometimes disrupt the in-time process in various ways. As if the over-time operations of the computer, however lightning fast these may be, is sometimes too much for the performance to carry, making it impossible for the interactive interface to inform the digital system in a useful way. The reasons for the failure may be due to poor interaction design but it may equally well be due to a limited understanding for the prerequisites of computer interaction on the part of the performers. Either way, in the way that the use of interactive computers in artistic practice highlights questions relating to in-time interaction makes it both artistically and conceptually interesting, and although the problems related to human-computer interaction in real-time artistic practice may be seen as particular to its context, any knowledge produced about the interaction and about the ways in which it may be improved, may well be of interest also outside of that field. The significance of arts based research in this context has at least two axes: (1) to more fully understand the notion of liveness and temporal embeddedness in the real-time arts involving computers, and (2) to inform the design of new human-computer interfaces.

At the same time, research performed in this context may very well prove to be of great interest within the field of artistic practice as well as with regard to related fields of inquiry in the natural and social sciences.  


Footnotes:  [1]  I am indebted the in-time versus over-time terminology to Vijay <cite type="year">iyer08</cite> who is referring to it in a discussion on embodiment in improvisation. For the original source along with a few additional on the topic of robotics and cognitive science. See also <cite>smithers96;smithers:98;vangelder98</cite>
[2]  And, according to Gregory Bateson, a difference that makes a difference is the definition of *Information* <cite>Bateson</cite> (p. 92) 
[3]  ``interactive, *a*.'' The Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. 1989. OED Online. Oxford University Press. 1 Nov. 2007. [[http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry/50118746]] 
[4]  To be fair, any performed composition is altered by its performance in one way or another, but, in the Western art music tradition, radical in performance alterations of the written music are more likely to be called mistakes rather than interpretation.[5]  The topic is brought up by British improviser and composer Trevor Wishart who rhetorically asks what constitutes music: ``what we experience in the sounds, or what we might theoretically appreciate of the score through the sounds [...]'' <cite>wis96</cite> 