* 
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: section
  :CLASS: unnumbered
  :END:

To listen to the other. The phrase raises an incalculable number of
issues. One of the central topics in teaching improvisation is to learn
how to listen to those with whom one plays, but in my experience the
most difficult task to listen to the self. The point of listening to the
other in performance is not completely to give up the self, nor is it to
become the other, but to attune to, or find resonance with the other. It
is in the interaction between two or more musicians the open and unbound
improvisation is unfolding, in the space between adjusting to the other,
and listening to the self. In this paper, I will use my artistic
practice in the Swedish-Vietnamese group The Six Tones as a context for
approaching some of these questions concerning self and other by means
of three concepts, each of which have a profound influence on the self:
freedom, habit and individuality. Though these concepts are very broad
and deep, they will be tackled in a relatively limited and practical
context.

The impact of freedom, being such an essential concept in the
understanding of improvisation, is closely related to some of the more
social and political topics that I will touch upon, and can be
understood in a number of ways, such as freedom /of the self/ and
freedom /from the self/. Habit is a factor that can both limit the space
for freedom and participate in allowing for it, and there are a number
of examples of habit destruction as a creative force. Habit is part of
the constitution of the self and detaching habit from the self may be a
method to introduce change. Individuality, an equally important aspect
of jazz and improvised music, is interesting and complex and can
participate in turning freedom-of-the-self into a power of domination.
Freedom is a necessary condition for the individual expression which in
turn may reduce the space of freedom to others. In The Six Tones,
situated as it is in an intercultural context, the meanings of self,
other, listening, habit and individuality are investigated also outside
a purely musical realm. Starting from the conceptually, stylistically as
well as geographically local perspective the paper is ending with a
discussion on center and periphery in a post-colonial context, and, as a
preliminary remark, I believe that it is both possible and important to
engage in a social and political discourse, and I am confident that the
art field, and specifically the field of artistic research, is an
appropriate arena for this.

I am not attempting to use a theoretical framework and applying it to
the artistic work flow. Rather, I am concerned with understanding what
was going on in the early stages of our work in the group, and to
understand my own initial and consequent reactions. By filtering these
experiences through the thoughts presented below, and understanding my
own reactions as expressions of a system of domination I can approach my
own artistic practice as a vehicle for social and political thinking
through music, and I can approach the difficult questions concerning
self, habit and freedom. The method employed is a recursive cycle
through stages of artistic practice, reflection, evaluation, and theory
as practice.

* 
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: sec:self-artist-prod
  :CLASS: unnumbered
  :END:

The notion of the self is a philosophically complex issue, and I am not
claiming that this text is an exhaustive account of all possible angles.
My primary interest is the role of the self as seen from a very
practical perspective: In a musical interaction how can the self at the
same time be responsive to the other, be free and be individual and what
is the epistemology for this aspiration? By virtue of the subjective
nature of improvisation, and many other creative practicies, the role of
the self is essential to the various processes in artistic work such as
creation, evaluation, construction and presentation. Many theories have
been developed to explain the operations of the "mysterious nature of
the self" \citep[][p. 167]{griffiths10}, subject to constant change, but
the mere attempt to define its nature appears to change it. That ones
reflection upon the self in fact alters it is a founding property of
most kinds of therapy, though there is no way of knowing whether it is
the understanding of the self or the self itself that is altered. The
connection and interdependence of self with time and place, with the
other, with the body and the socio-political spheres and power relations
makes it clear that it is in a consistently uncompleted state, in a
capacity of constant becoming. Anthropologist Gregory Bateson, to whom
we will return later in this text, identifies the self as an aggregation
of "habits of perception and adaptive action"
\citep[p. 242]{bateson72:steps}. Although his definition may appear to
be too formal in this context, bringing in habit as a defining property
of the self is significant, and part of my argument here is that
altering habitual responses is a way to alter the self.

As an illustration of one of the ways in which the meeting with the
other changes, not only the self but also the other, Deleuze and
Guattari claims it to be possible to move across, or transgress, the
border between self and other: "Whenever there is transcoding, we can be
sure that there is not a simple addition, but the constitution of a new
plane, as of a surplus value. A melodic or rhythmic plane, surplus value
of passage or bridging" \citep[p. 346]{deleuze80}.[fn:1] I would like to
argue that improvisation in particular is a powerful site for exploring
questions concerning subjectivity, identity and the spheres of self and
other, and many of the principal aspects of the meeting between self and
other can be anticipated and expanded in the domain of musical practice.
Counterpoint, and the simultaneous interaction between several voices at
once, would render any verbal discussion incomprehensible and impossible
to follow, whereas in music, it may even do the opposite: create greater
clarity. Listening is fundamental to all musical practices and listening
to the other is an essential aspect of any relation: "since music making
is something we inevitably do with others (whether they are present or
not), musical dialogue is /fundamentally/ ethical in nature"
\citep[p. 164]{benson03}.

Although very difficult to define, freedom in general is a recurring
concept in the discussion of musical improvisation. What is the function
of freedom in the constitution of the self? In a more general context
Hanna \citet{arendt77} claims that "to raise the question, What is
freedom? seems to be a hopeless enterprise", and freedom is no less
complicated when discussed in relation to musical practices. Free jazz
has been a genre since Ornette Coleman's epic release /Free Jazz: A
Collective Improvisation/ \citep{coleman60} and ever since has there
been a discussion as to what has actually been freed in the process. Is
it the musician that is liberated or the music? Or something else? The
free jazz movement in the USA in the 1960's was intimately linked to the
civil rights movement adding a political dimension to the discussion. On
the surface improvisation may seem as a means to create music that is
free from the chains of the formal structures that, e.g. notation
imposes on the musician. Subjectivity and individuality is, and has
been, a powerful agent in much of jazz and improvised music, as it has
rejected the generality that other kinds of music has advocated.[fn:2]
Even though we know that such descriptions are not correct, the
prevailing notion is that jazz is a music that may be created on the
spot and whose substance is defined by the will of the improviser rather
than by external factors or structures.

Many have rightly criticized the understanding of jazz and improvised
music as devoid of planning, and ignorant to history and memory, but the
field is complex and the concept of improvisation will not let itself be
defined on only one axis. The idea of the improvising musician as a
"mystic who is unable to describe his or her own creative process is a
staple of conventional cultural wisdom about jazz"
\citep[p. 170]{lewis-1}, proposed by established, privileged and
canonical composers as well as by improvising musicians themselves. It
should however be noted that many of the attempts to target
improvisation as unforeseen, unplanned, spontaneous and based primarily
on "feelings" is to a significant degree a political strategy with which
jazz musicians has been kept outside the central structures of cultural
funding. An expression that according to a popular view to a significant
degree is made up in the moment cannot be taken seriously in a culture
otherwise driven by the auteur.

The claim on jazz musicians to be both strongly individual and free at
the same time quickly becomes problematic as the two concepts are
connected. With reference to one's right to be individual one may may
end up using one's personal freedom to claim the right to control the
situation at the expense of the freedom of the other. This is a
surprisingly common mode in jazz improvisation where both freedom and
power of expression and musical readability are highly valued. In his
book /The Philosophy of Improvisation/ Gary \citet{peters09} calls it
the "aporia of freedom". Though freedom is generally thought of as a
positive concept he claims it to be a mistake to neglect its
"questionable duality" (p. 21): "my freedom comes at the expense of the
other's freedom, my own autonumous world at the expense of the other's
heteronomy" \citep[p. 165]{benson03}. This duality is perhaps even more
obvious in the light of the mythical view of the creator, a Kantian
genius, who enjoys the undeniable freedom of the artist. To this artist
subjectivity and individuality are not choices, they belong to his
vocation and constitute the very nature and value of artistic work. As
an emblematic representation of the notion of the true creative
virtuouso Pierre Boulez expressed a sheer lack of understanding for
Cage's idea of setting ones own intention to the side. To avoid or even
neglect the qualified projection of the self in determination would be
simply irresponsible \citep{boulez64}.[fn:3] In the context of
improvisation the autonomous creator may not be as intrusive, but the
combination of creativity as an immanent and individually constituted
property, and freedom will indeed risk to circumbscribe the freedom of
the other. Furthermore, the romantic nineteenth century artist has
created a mythology so powerful that, still today, it has an impact on
authors, composers and musicians alike. The creative act is so strongly
soldered to this image that even the understanding of an improvising
musician, whose creativity depends not on work creation but on the
real-time impulses in performance is informed by it and as such, the
individual self is influenced.

Although the search for an individual sound in most cases is a very
conscious act there is a corresponding search for the pure, or
unconscious, expression, exemplified by Ornette Coleman's attempts to
short-circuit the habitual aspects of his saxophone playing. In order to
be able to "create as spontaneously as possible--'without memory,' as he
has often been quoted as saying" \citet[p. 117]{litzweiler92}, without
any 'real' training he started playing the violin and the trumpet. These
instruments gave him the freedom to play and improvise in a manner that
his memory made it difficult for him to do on saxophone. When playing
the saxophone he would be partly ruled by his meta-knowledge, his
knowledge /about/ playing the saxophone. Habits encoded mentally as well
as bodily would also influence him and, to Ornette Coleman, this was a
hindrance to his spontaneity. On the violin he adopted a highly original
technique that allowed him to bypass "not only the jazz tradition, but
Western musical traditions altogether. He had no teachers or guides to
show him how to play trumpet and violin and purposely avoided learning
standard techniques" \citet[p. 117]{litzweiler92}. Freedom of memory and
freedom of influence from extra-musical parameters. The 'unknown'
instruments gave Coleman a sense of /internal/ freedom, liberated from
the physical memory associated with his saxophone playing. He approached
a self expression where the transformation from intention to result was
not ruled by a preconceived notion of what it should sound like. Coleman
identify the embodied memory as perhaps the most important dimension in
the struggle to be free, and by using a new tool he neutralizes the
impact of the habits related to his saxophone playing.

* 
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: sec:tu-dai-oan
  :CLASS: unnumbered
  :END:

In early 2006 Stefan Östersjö and I initiated a project together with
Ngyen Thanh Thuy and Ngo Tra My, two Vietnamese musicians temporarily
visiting Sweden at the time, as guest teachers at Malmö Academy of
Music. Thuy plays dan tranh, a traditional Vietnamese zither played by
plucking the strings with the right hand, adding vibrato and glissandi
with the left hand. The dan tranh is related to the Korean kayagum and
the Japanese koto. The dan bau, played by My, is a single chord
instrument played with a bamboo plectrum with the right hand while
altering the pitch with the left hand by pushing, or pulling, a rod,
thus stretching or relaxing the string. Different overtones can be
produced depending on where the string is plucked and the sound of the
string is picked up with a magnetic pickup and amplified through a small
speaker. Since 2006 we have done a number of tours and projects in many
different constellations and settings under the name The Six Tones.

The Six Tones is an encounter between traditional Vietnamese music and
experimental Western European music, and since the very beginning the
main objective has been to find forms for interaction between these two
musical cultures on more or less equal terms. However, apart from the
musical intercultural intentions the group has become a site for
experimentation and examination of the political and social meaning and
impact of that ambition. Experimentation is a central concept to us and
"by definition, experimental data must be able to behave in a way not
predicted by the hypothesis. Thus, the experiment is conceived as an
excellent setting for exploration and discovery, a perfect opportunity
for an encounter with the new, the unforeseen, and the unfamiliar"
\citep[p. 165]{corbett2000}. In order to truly encounter the new and the
unforeseen, challenging different aspects of the notion of center and
periphery was necessary: is Western art music the norm and traditional
Vietnamese music an exotic other? Are Stefan and I 'visiting' a music
outside of our own sphere, or is it rather Thuy and My that are forced
to approach us. Is it at all possible to communicate on equal terms in a
context that holds so many economic and social inequalities? Are we as
Westerners able to rid ourselves of the colonial heritage that in many
respects still govern our interactions with the east when we meet Thuy
and My in this group? These are questions belong to the larger project
of The Six Tones, and will not be thoroughly probed in this text, but it
is nevertheless possible to distil the questions into the more
individually oriented: What is the role of the self in the encounter
with the other? Even though my own interest in the self in artistic
practice started more than a decade before we initiated The Six Tones
the project strengthened my belief that self, individuality, freedom and
habit were important agents whose interrelations are substantial in, and
outside of, my musical practice.

To begin with we had to reevaluate our own musical identities, and for
myself I had to question my roles as composer and improviser and
reconsider what my level of influence should be, and what it could
become. In order to create the necessary preconditions for the two
different musical traditions to intermingle rather than coexist void of
deeper interaction, the individual influence on the musical structures
had to be carefully negotiated. As a result of our lack of experience in
such collaborations our first meetings were very tentative. I found it
extremely difficult to balance my own initiatives and leaving enough
space for the input of Thuy and My. One reason was the lack of a shared
language and another was the social asymmetry between the two subgroups.
The fact that the geographic origin of the four members was paralell to
their gender made the collaboration saturated with disparity and
inequality. Although music can be seen as a neutral form for
communication with the prospect of compensating social differences, it
may equally well disguise them. While we were in the known environment
of the music academy--at home musically, culturally and socially--they
were visitors and foreigners without language or context.

Reflecting upon the situation brings forth questions concerning
identity, culture, power and habit, all of which are to some degree
interrelated, and in a culturally and socially homogeneous context many
of these questions are not even raised. They are unnecessary as much of
the negotiation has been going on in a larger context, outside of the
rehearsal space. Common signifiers, references and aesthetic
negotiations, inherited and nurtured since the early development of
musician and composer are easily accessible. A collaboration, however,
does not have to be between two different musical and artistic cultures
in order to raise issues such as those we encountered in The Six Tones.
Simply bringing together musicians from different genres may create
obstacles difficult, or plain impossible, to maneuver.

At our first meeting in the composition studio at the Malmö Academy of
Music I became incredibly self aware of the asymmetry between Stefan and
I and Thuy and My. Given the history of Vietnam in particular, and the
history of the white man in general, the fear that my identity,
individuality and cultural background would get in the way of Thuy's and
My's freedom to participate on their own terms. But instead of letting
them /speak for themselves/, I leaned on my preconception of what it
means to be a female Vietnamese visitor in Sweden. While trying to
compensate for what I perceived as vulnerability I accomplished the
opposite: I subjugated them to my own understanding of the world, the
context, the music and our interaction. Because they could not speak
within our regulatory framework they remained voiceless. This is an
archetypal way in which the Western subject has dealt with the other, it
is habitual response.[fn:4] Much later I learned that I was wrong in my
assumptions of Thuy and My. Yes, they felt they were in a foreign
environment with limited latitude, but initially they had no problem
with the interaction with us, other than my behaviour. After all, they
were not only foreigners, they were also professional musicians ready to
get involved in a new project. It is possible to argue that the
predicament was now settled, that there was no need to dig deeper into
the imbalance between the two subgroups. Part of my argument here,
however, is that some of the behavioural patterns involved in an
intercultural meeting such as this are centuries old and will influence
the self even after the insight. As is so well described by Edward Said,
for a change to be carried out it is not enough to speak of the
asymmetry, it is necessary to also restore that which was once
converted:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  Formally the Orientalist sees him-self as accomplishing the union of
  Orient and Occident, but mainly by reasserting the technological,
  political, and cultural supremacy of the West. History, in such a
  union, is radically attentuated if not banished. Viewed as a current
  of development, as a narrative strand, or as a dynamic force unfolding
  systematically and materially in time and space, human history---of
  the East or the West---is subordinated to an essentialist, idealist
  conception of Occident and Orient. Because he feels himself to be
  standing at the very rim of the East-West divide, the Orientalist not
  only speaks in vast generalities; he also seeks to convert each aspect
  of Oriental or Occidental life into an unmediated sign of one or the
  other geo-graphical half. \citep[246-7]{said1978}
#+END_QUOTE

In the following I will attempt to describe the continuous growth of the
group that followed this initial, and largely unsuccessful encounter,
and describe the evolution of our project through our interpretation of
the song /Tu Dai Oan/.

** 
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: sec:tu-ddai-oan
   :CLASS: unnumbered
   :END:

/Tu Dai Oan/ is a popular traditional Vietnamese tune in the Oan mode.
Although the idea of playing Vietnamese traditional music in The Six
Tones occurred soon after our first meetings in 2006 /Tu Dai Oan/ was
first picked up in 2007 when we started working on the version that we
have since been playing. In Vietnam the song is very popular and it is
often heard played on a dan tranh, an instrument on which the tune is
naturally idiomatic. Stefan did a transcription for ten-stringed guitar
and to have a greater control over vibrati and glissandi, he played it
with a slide. Such ornamentations are important in the Vietnamese
tradition and the musical mode depicts how, and where, to perform them.

The decision to do a trio version of /Tu Dai Oan/ for dan tranh,
ten-stringed guitar and live electronics was an attempt to create a
structure with a wide range of expressive opportunities. Being a plucked
string instrument with a wooden resonance box, the ten-stringed guitar
bridges the gap between the dan tranh, and the electronics. Distinct
from the Vietnamese lute, the ty ba,[fn:5] the ten-stringed guitar, has
many properties in common with the dan tranh. The challenge to create a
coherent version of the tune was obviously not resolved merely by
instrumentation, and the predicament we found ourselves in 2006 had to
be avoided. Thuy is a master musician in the tradition, Stefan had at
the time practiced playing Vietnamese music on his instrument for about
six months and I had explored it for about the same time period. With no
more than a rudimentary sense for Vietnames music Stefan and I had
little understanding for the nuances of the tradition, and, at the time,
Thuy had only just begun to explore contemporary Western music.
Furthermore, we had barely no commen spoken language. With the ambition
to create a shared space to explore the music without beeing too closely
tied to neither Thuy's tradition nor our own while at the same time
retain enough signifying traits from both styles of music to make them
identifiable, performance was the only useful means of communication.
Hence, we had to improvise.

In his presentation at EMS 2006 /Appropriation, exchange, understanding/
British electronic music authority Simon \citet{emmerson06} points to
how musicians have always exchanged concepts and ideas through the act
of performance itself, often without language. But Emmerson also brings
up how any mode of exchange involves some kind of distortion, reduction,
impoverishment or loss, and continues: "While some of these losses will
be an inevitable result of global social change, the ethical question of
knowledge and awareness cannot be avoided" (ibid.).[fn:6] Though our
awareness of the complexity of the project grew over time, the social
and political dimensions were part of The Six Tones since the beginning,
but the important issue, raised by Emmerson, is how to identify the
values that could be jeopardized in a collaboration. He also points out
that the idea of intercultural music is commonly channeled through
Western technologies such as notation, and performed using European
performance practicies. The overarching goal with The Six Tones,
however, was to dismantle the binary between distinction between East
and West and not disregard any of the performance traditions involved.
We were looking for a dynamic meeting between the traditions, and
exchange rather than apropriation of knowledge to be at the centre.
Looking back at the process Emmerson is indeed correct when concluding
that in intercultural projects there is a need to develop "a sensitivity
to different significant sound qualities and behaviours, as well as
different aesthetic and cultural values, in a very practical sense, so
that we are aware of what is lost in an intercultural transaction." (p.
8)

A working session and a concert at the The Vietnam National Academy of
Music in the fall of 2006 turned out to be a pivotal moment in the
development of The Six Tones. If the first meeting in Malmö was terribly
hesitant and governed by failed attempts to counteract the perceived
inequity within the group, the visit to Hanoi had a notable impact on
the development of the project. To encounter Thuy and My in their own
country made a tangible difference, reinforced by a temporary reversal
of the roles as Stefan and I were now the visitors in a foreign country
with little understanding of the codes and of the culture.

This was emphasized by learning about the gender roles in Vietnam,
different to those in the West. A striking number of the positions held
by women in Vietnam are in Europe traditionally held by men. The dean,
as well as a majority of the other significant positions at the Academy
of Music, are held by women and many of the tasks at the other end of
the hierarchy, such as cleaners and secretaries, are carried out by men.
According to \citet{VanKy2002} women in Vietnam has had a strong
position historically, but the situation which we encountered in Hanoi
is most likely influenced rather by the responsibilities Vietnamese
women had to carry in the Vietnam War than by the histoical evidences of
matriarchy. However, to experience this subtle but important difference
clearly affected the relations in the group, and whether or not there
had ever been good reasons to treat Thuy and My cautiously as fragile,
sensible and subordinate women, seeing them in their home country made
it clear there was no longer any need to do so.[fn:7] As a consequence,
thanks to a merely rudimentary insight into the Vietnamese society, the
field for interaction in the group had a radically altered premise, the
main difference being the way in which I could approach Thuy and My. I
was to some extent able to break free from my preconception of them as
foreigners, victimized by definition, break free from the standard
response, the habit. I was now able to listen.

It may seem self evident that a closer contact with a foreign culture
and social system, the music of which one is interacting with, and
attempting to get better acquainted with, results in a more natural and
less strained communication, and that the opposite, lacking first hand
information about the specific music and culture, results in the kind of
confusion that was seen at the unfortunate start of the Six Tones.
However, the issue at stake here is not solely epistemological. Gregory
Bateson claims that in:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  the natural history of the living human being, ontology and
  epistemology cannot be separated. His (commonly unconscious) beliefs
  about what sort of world it is will determine how he sees it and acts
  within it, and his ways of perceiving and acting will determine his
  beliefs about its nature. The living man is thus bound within a net of
  epistemological and ontological premises which--regardless of ultimate
  truth or falsity--become partially self-validating for him.
  \citep[p. 314]{bateson72:steps}
#+END_QUOTE

Looking at human behaviour as a holistic, cybernetic system in the way
Bateson is suggesting, one may return once again to the first rehearsal
and look at it as an unstable system with no means for self-correction.
With good intentions I tried to compensate for a postulated inequality
assuming that I, as in my 'self', could correct the imbalance. According
to Bateson that would have been impossible. The stability of a complex
system, such as a group of musicians playing together, is a function of
the product of all the parts of the system (of all the "transformations
of difference" (p. 316) as Bateson calls it) and there is no way in
which one part of the system can control all other unilaterally. On the
contrary, at any point in time, every part of the system has to adapt
their actions according to information from within the system. In other
words, the problem was not so much that we did not have a language, but
that we were unequipped to pick up the existing information within the
group, and adjust accordingly. To instead fall back on habit, as I did,
thinking that the self, by itself, can counterbalance lack of
information is a characteristic of an Occidental attitude which,
according to Bateson, has a cultural and social predisposition towards
thinking about the self as a delimited agent performing purposive action
upon objects rather than seeing the holistic aspects of the system.
Although arriving at the issue from very different angles there is a
parallelism between Bateson's Occidental self unable to see himself as
part of a larger, mutually dependent system, Said's description of the
Orientalist reasserting the cultural supremacy of the West and
Emmerson's appeal, in intercultural projects, to develop sensitivity
towards different aesthetic and cultural values. All of them indentify a
problematic aspect of the Western self in the encounter with the
non-European other.

It was not until the year after our first visit in Hanoi that we started
working with /Tu Dai Oan/. In the years to follow we would play it
numerous times and we continued to develop the form and the expression.
Although referred to as an improvisation /Tu Dai Oan/ is part of a
tradition of playing that is in fact very fixed and which only allows
for a limited set of possible permutations. Even if our intention was
not primarily to propagate a traditional style of playing we hoped to
maintain enough significant traits of the original piece for the music
to be recognizable as coming out of the Vietnamese musical heritage.
Learning from our earlier experiences our method was to move forward
cautiously and in constant dialogue with Thuy, the only one with a solid
experience from playing traditional Vietnamese music. In many of the
rehearsals[fn:8] we let Thuy have the initiative while Stefan and I
would stay in the background, only occasionally fronting ideas or
commenting performances. At this point we already had some common
experiences as well as a greater understanding for our respective
musical, social and cultural backgrounds, but we were still in absence
of a common language, which is, returning to Emmerson, not a seldom
situation in intercultural projects. In preparation for the upcoming
Scandinavian tour, as part of my repository I had made a virtual
instrument with the intention to make it sound like a combination of dan
tranh and dan bau. This was initself a break with how I usually work.
Generally more interested in sounds that are the result of an
interaction, to prepare a pitched instrument to play notes was not at
all natural to my electronic music practice. There was however a need
for me to be able to take initatives to which Thuy could react. A
property of live interactive electronic music in real time, with a focus
on processing or live sampling is that no sound can be produced until a
sound has been received and I had seen that this was a problem in our
group. In order to become more interactive I had to become less so. Once
I arrived at a relatively satisfying compromise with the instrument, I
entered all the pitches of /Tu Dai Oan/ in an array and let the
instrument step through the pitches for each trigger, allowing me to
focus on the timing of the onset, the intonation and the glissandi.
Though there was nothing wrong with this instrument the desired effect,
to aurally bridge the conceptual and cultural gap between the acoustic
Vietnamese dan tranh and the electronics, was lacking. In fact, the more
I obscured this instrument from its original sound, the more effects I
added to it, the better it seemed to be working. The concept of it, and
its conceptual afiliation to the glissandi and vibrati of the other
instruments appeared to be more important than the sound quality. Even
after the modifications of it, however, this simple synthesizer was so
far from the techniques I would ususally use, that to actually play it
in performance was incredibly awkward in the beginning. I had to
forcefully break with my aesthetics and habits of playing electronics,
the reward being that the performances worked really well.

Not being able to efficiently discuss and negotiate the performances in
the rehearsals made it necessary to use a trial and error method. By
going through short iterations of cycles of play--evaluate--alter, we
slowly raised our awareness of what could work. Through this method we
were able to not only practice our own communication, or refine our
group as a cybernetic system, it turned out to also be an effective way
to teach each other about some of the specifics of our respective
playing traditions and, perhaps even more importantly, to learn how to
negotiate parts of our performance traditions. One of the early choices
we did concerning the form was to expand the traditionally rather free
introduction--the part of the tune where the performer had real freedom
to improvise in a Western sense. We inserted an improvised section in
the middle, and at the end we added an extended improvisation. The dan
tranh and the guitar played the tune and I joined in primarily in the
improvisatory sections. This was a form kept intact over the years of
playing /Tu Dai Oan/, in itself a way to keep an alliance to traditional
Vietnamese origin of the tune, but it was also an efficient way to allow
ourselves to re-negotiate the details of the structure of the
performance. By staying with the form we could develop our musical
interaction and attune ourselves to the "transforms of differences"
\citep[p. 318]{bateson72:steps}, something that allowed for quite
radical changes to the shape of the form.

Simon \citet{emmerson06} is warning us of the risk of masking, that some
aspect or porperty of one sound will obscure some property of another.
This line of thinking can be expanded to the level where one culture may
mask another. Colonialism among other things, has resulted cultural
appropriation or cultural imperialism, and in The Six Tones
appropriation was something we thought we could identify, but the subtle
concept of masking is difficult to spot. Masking will probably occur to
a certain extent in any kind of music, but the question asked by
Emmerson: "have we masked something 'significant' as seen from within
the culture?" is material: It is not so much /if/ something is lost as
/what/, what the importance of this property is, and from what
perspective the loss may be experienced. Perhaps my physical modeling
instrument was problematic as a virtual copy of the dan tranh than it
was as a deviation from the real instrument? Perhaps it masked the
Vietnamese instrument due to its similarity with it, but reinforced it
as it grew different? The way I developed my part in /Tu Dai Oan/ was in
effect a movement away from my initial respect for the Vietnamese
tradition instead approaching a genuinely experimental mode of playing.
However, at the same time, this development had nothing to do with a
lack of respect, quite the contrary. I feel inclined to argue that the
attitude I had in the beginning of the project, before our first trip to
Hanoi, was lacking in respect. My assumptions about Vietnamese music,
though constructed in good faith, were not informed by the tradition
itself but rather by my prejudices about it. When \citet{emmerson06}
warns us about masking and writes that if the exchange continues, "in
time the masked element may disappear as it no longer functions within
the music" we must not take it too literal. In our case, to think that
we could erase or destroy parts of the living tradition of Vietnamese
music would be to overestimate the influence and power of our group.
Regardless of the validity of this otherwise legitimate concern, our
experience in The Six Tones is that we could go quite far mixing the two
modes of expression without any masking of significant traits in the
original music. The more important attunement performed was that in the
social dimension. As this grew stronger, our musical artifacts did also.

Finally, it is interesting to note that while Stefan saw it necessary to
go much deeper into the theory and practice of playing Vietnamese
traditional music, I was more concerned with /not/ making authenticity a
parameter in my playing. One reason is that Stefan's instrument has a
certain affinity with the instruments we worked with, whereas
electronics finds no evident response in the Vietnamese musical
tradition. Over time I became more and more audacious in my experiments
with the music.[fn:9] The consequence of this attitude was that in
concerts I took bold chances, sometimes resulting in 'errors' and some
of these experiments eventually resulted in changes to the dynamics of
the form. The effect of my 'error' assumed the unintended function of
Coleman's violin, the "abrupt disappointment of expectations of meaning"
that makes us reconsider what we heard and how we experienced it
\citep{barthes68:death_of}. Returning to the idea of the group as a
cybernetic system we can use Bateson's language and arrive at the
experimental conclusion that once the system has come to a point where
transforms of differences are communicated efficiently between the
different parts even great discontinuities, such as my errors, are
handled well. I will argue, however, the basis for that claim is that
experimentation is an agreed method and, most importantly, that the self
is prepared to break with habits and listen to the other.

* 
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: sec:discussion
  :CLASS: unnumbered
  :END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  A clarified political and methodological commitment to the dismantling
  of systems of domination which since they are collectively maintained
  must [...] be collectively fought. \citep[p. 215]{said2000}
#+END_QUOTE

There is an obvious tendency to always look at western art music as the
center and whatever is external to it as the periphery. The Eurocentric
view is rooted in the concept of the West as the social, economical and
political focal point in the world in which the music of, say, a
Vietnamese musician will always grounded in the periphery. As such, it
can serve as a peculiar and colorful complement but never engage in an
encounter with the West on equal terms. Attributing values to it such as
'beautiful' or 'masterful' does not change its locus and does not move
its status closer to the center. Quite the opposite: aestheticising the
other, or the expressions of the other, is an effective way to keep it
locked out. Many writers and scholars have brought these issues to
discussion. Apart from the works already cited in this paper, to only
mention a few, we find George Lewis using Somers' ideas of the
epistemological other to discuss the situation of African American jazz
musicians \citep{lewis-1}, post-colonial theorist and philosopher
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak who rhetorically asks /Can the subaltern
speak/?, Edward Said discussing the enormous inequality in the war in
Palestine in /Permission to narrate/, and Gloria Jean Watkins, also
known as bell hooks, who approaches her own background in racist America
in the significant text /Marginality as site of
resistance/\cite{HooksBell1990}.

Deleuze's and Guattari's supposition that in transcoding, becoming-other
is a way to resolve the opposition between self and other, east and
west, center and periphery, is quite forcefully rejected by
\citet{spivak1988}. Taking a broad view on the world she is posing
important questions concerning the continuous marginalization of those
without, or with only limited, access to the sources of cultural
imperialism. In her surevey, as has already been mentioned, because the
Eurocentric subjectivity, according to Spivak epitomized by Deleuze and
Foucault, threatens to further obscure the subaltern:[fn:10]

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  It is not only that everything they read, critical or uncritical, is
  caught within the debate of the production of that Other, supporting
  or critiquing the constitution of the Subject as Europe. It is also
  that, in the constitution of that Other of Europe, great care was
  taken to obliterate the textual ingredients with which such a subject
  could cathect, could occupy (invest?) its itinerary.
  \citep[p. 75]{spivak1988}
#+END_QUOTE

What is the significance of these complex issues concerning economy,
hyper-capitalism, world domination and post-colonialism in the context
of contemporary music? How can the deconstruction of the concepts of
center and periphery be applied to the artistic practice of a group
consisting of two Vietnamese and two Swedish musicians? Why is it
necessary to consider inherited power structures when approaching the
seemingly simple task of creating a workable platform for musical and
cultural interaction? What impact does it have on the notion of the
self? My hypothesis here is that the self is constituted of behavioural
habits, conscious as well as unconscious, as suggested by
\citet{bateson72:cyber-self}, and that these are culturally encoded with
ideas concerning freedom and individuality, and in the arts these are
built on the idea of artistic projective self \citep{frisk2013}.
Although it is easy to understand that the habits and the cultural codes
are different in other cultures, according to postcolonial thinking,
knowing is not enough \citep[See e.g.][]{said2000,frisk-ost13}: to let
the other speak, and to allow oneself to listen, it is necessary to
break some of these habits. After several years of working together my
experience is that, within the context of The Six Tones, I do not have
the experience that I have to limit my artistic latitude, nor that any
of the other members do it. The reason we have arrived here, however, is
that we initially worked consciously with breaking our habits and
limiting our freedom some of which I have described above. I argue that
artistic practice is a useful arena for exploring these and similar
questions. The topic that I have brought up in this paper, to foster the
social and political dimension of musical interaction through
improvisation, by exploring the self and the consequences of freedom and
habit formation, may be successfully investigated through the practice
itself.

At a time when art in general, and music in particular, is commodified
to a degree that not even Adorno could have anticipated, artistic
research is one of the few remaining fields that has the potential to
withstand entrepreneurial tendencies in the music academies and within
the field of music itself, and ceaselessly engage in the important
artistic and social questions that lay ahead of us.

[fn:1] See also \citep[][p. 140]{semetsky2011}

[fn:2] After all, composing for symphony orchestra will only make sense
       if the sounds it offers are relatively general. Hence, the
       symphony orchestra is a machine that proposes a finite set of
       sounds and as such it would cease to work if its musicians would
       begin to promote their own individual and singular sound similar
       to how Ben Webster and Johnny Hodges had done in the Duke
       Ellington Orchestra.

[fn:3] See also my discussion in \citet[p. 144-5]{frisk2013}

[fn:4] I will return to this question towards the end of the paper.

[fn:5] The Ty Ba is closely related to the Chinese Pipa.

[fn:6] This quote appears only in the abstract of the paper (see:
       [[http://www.ems-network.org/spip.php?article292]], visited July
       13, 2013), not in the paper itself.

[fn:7] For a more in depth and comprehensive account of gender roles in
       Vietnam, see \citet{drummond2004}

[fn:8] The rehearsals discussed here were carried out at the Electronic
       Music Studios in Stockholm (EMS) in the late winter of 2009 and
       we have near to complete video recordings of them. The actual
       events in the rehearsals are discussed in greater detail in
       \citet{Ostersjo2013}

[fn:9] By audacious I mean that, although I am less concerned with right
       or wrong, and less focused on the history and idiomatics of the
       tradition as it takes shape in my own playing, I obviously have a
       deep respect for the Vietnamese musical tradition as it is
       carried on by master musicians such as Thuy and My.

[fn:10] There have been attempts to seek redress for Deleuze, Guattari
        and Foucault and prove that their thinking was not rooted in
        Eurocentricity and that it will not necessarily lead to
        oppression of the other \citep[See e.g.][]{robinson2010}.
